Add websockets and data messages (#42)
fixie-ai/ultradox: docs/src/content/docs/guides/connectionoptions.mdx

---
title: "Connection Options: WebRTC, Telephony, and WebSockets"
description: Use Ultravox to make and receive calls using WebRTC, via Twilio, or over direct WebSocket connections.
---

import { Steps, Tabs, TabItem } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

The Ultravox API allows you to create AI-powered voice applications that can interact through various protocols:

- **WebRTC** → Default protocol for browser and mobile applications.
- **Regular Phone Numbers** → Receive incoming or make outgoing phone calls (via Twilio).
- **WebSockets** → Direct server-to-server integration.

> This guide covers setting up and using the Ultravox API with different connection options. See the [SDK](../sdk) page for more information if you are building a browser or mobile application.
> 
> ## Choosing a Protocol
> Choose your integration method based on your needs:
> 
> - **WebRTC**: Best for browser and mobile applications. This is the default. Get started with the Ultravox client [SDK](../sdk).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Choosing a Protocol
Choose your integration method based on your needs:

- **WebRTC**: Best for most integrations, especially for any client deployment (for example, browsers or mobile clients). This is the default. Get started with the Ultravox client [SDK](../sdk).
```

For more information on Twilio, refer to the [Twilio documentation](https://www.twilio.com/docs).

:::note[Twilio Support]
We currently integrate with Twilio. Please let us know if there's another integration you'd like to see.
:::

### Creating a Phone Call with Twilio
:::tip[Prerequisites]
Make sure you have:
1. An active Twilio account
1. A phone number purchased from Twilio
:::

Creating an Ultravox call that works with Twilio is just like creating a WebRTC call, but there are two parameters to the [Create Call](./api/calls/#create-call) command worth special attention:

<table class="w-full">
    <tr class="w-full">
        <th class="w-1/12"></th>
        <th class="w-1/12"></th>
        <th class="w-10/12"></th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td class="font-mono">medium</td>
        <td>object</td>
        <td>Tells Ultravox which protocol to use. <br />For Twilio, must be set to `{"twilio": {}}` and sets the call to use Twilio [Media Streams](https://www.twilio.com/docs/voice/media-streams). Defaults to `{"webRtc": {}}` which sets the protocol to WebRTC.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td class="font-mono">firstSpeaker</td>
        <td>string</td>

>         <td>Tells Ultravox who should speak first. For outgoing calls, typically set to `"FIRST_SPEAKER_USER"`. The defaul is `"FIRST_SPEAKER_AGENT"`.</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        <td>Tells Ultravox who should speak first. For outgoing calls, typically set to `"FIRST_SPEAKER_USER"`. The default is `"FIRST_SPEAKER_AGENT"`.</td>
```

    </tr>
</table>

Adding these to the request body when creating the call would look like this:

```javascript
{
  "systemPrompt": "You are a helpful assistant...",
  ...
  "medium": {
    "twilio": {}
  },

>   "firstSpeaker": "FIRST_SPEAKER_AGENT"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "firstSpeaker": "FIRST_SPEAKER_USER"
```

Based on the wording for outgoing/incoming calls below.

                    </Connect>
                </Response>`,
        to: phoneNumber, // the number you are calling
        from: twilioPhoneNumber // your twilio number
    });
    ```
</Steps>

See the [twilio-outgoing-call](https://github.com/fixie-ai/ultradox/tree/main/examples/twilio-outgoing-call) example for more.

This example shows one of the many options Twilio provides for making outgoing calls. Consult the [Twilio docs](https://www.twilio.com/docs) for more details.

### Incoming Calls
Incoming calls require essentially the same two steps as outgoing calls:

<Steps>
1. **Create an Ultravox Call** → Create a new call (see [above](#creating-a-phone-call-with-twilio)), and get a `joinUrl`. *Note: for incoming calls you will want to keep `firstSpeaker` set to the default ("FIRST_SPEAKER_AGENT").*

1. **Receive Inbound Twilio Phone call** → Use the `joinUrl` with a Twilio [`<Stream>`](https://www.twilio.com/docs/voice/twiml/stream).

    ```xml
    <!-- Example TwiML Response -->
    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
    <Response>
        <Connect>
            <Stream url="your_ultravox_join_url" />
        </Connect>
    </Response>

    ```
</Steps>

> The above shows how to create a TwiML Bin and use that for handling the inbound call. Consult the [Twilio docs](https://www.twilio.com/docs) for more on all the options Twilio provides for handling phone calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above shows how to create a TwiML response and use that for handling the inbound call. Consult the [Twilio docs](https://www.twilio.com/docs) for more on all the options Twilio provides for handling phone calls.
```

### Example: Creating an Ultravox Call with WebSockets
```javascript
    const response = await fetch('https://api.ultravox.ai/api/calls', {
        method: 'POST',
        headers: {
            'X-API-Key': 'your_api_key',
            'Content-Type': 'application/json'
        },
        body: JSON.stringify({
            systemPrompt: "You are a helpful assistant...",
            model: "fixie-ai/ultravox",
            voice: "Mark",
            medium: {
                serverWebSocket: {
                    inputSampleRate: 48000,
                    outputSampleRate: 48000,
                    clientBufferSizeMs: 30000
                }
            }
        })
    });

    const { joinUrl } = await response.json();
```

### Example: Joining a Call with Websockets
```python
import websockets

socket = await websockets.connect(join_url)
audio_send_task = asyncio.create_task(_send_audio(socket))
async for message in socket:
    if isinstance(message, bytes):
        # Handle agent audio data
    else:

>         # Handle data message. See *insert link to /datamessages*.

Reviewer: Can you add this link please?

Author: can't add a link in the code but added above

---
title: "Connection Options: WebRTC, Telephony, and WebSockets"
description: Use Ultravox to make and receive calls using WebRTC, via Twilio, or over direct WebSocket connections.
---

import { Steps, Tabs, TabItem } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

The Ultravox API allows you to create AI-powered voice applications that can interact through various protocols:

- **WebRTC** → Default protocol for browser and mobile applications.
- **Regular Phone Numbers** → Receive incoming or make outgoing phone calls (via Twilio).
- **WebSockets** → Direct server-to-server integration.

This guide covers setting up and using the Ultravox API with different connection options. See the [SDK](../sdk) page for more information if you are building a browser or mobile application.

## Choosing a Protocol
Choose your integration method based on your needs:

> - **WebRTC**: Best for browser and mobile applications. This is the default. The Ultravox client [SDK](../sdk) must be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **WebRTC**: Best for browser and mobile applications. This is the default. Get started with the Ultravox client [SDK](../sdk).
```

- **Twilio**: For traditional phone network integration.

> - **WebSocket**: For server-to-server integration, especially when you already have high-bandwidth connectionss between your server and clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **WebSocket**: For server-to-server integration, especially when you already have high-bandwidth connections between your server and clients.
```

## Twilio Integration

> Ultravox integrates with Twilio. This enables the creations of powerful AI-driven voice applications that interact with regular phone networks. This enables you to build AI agents that can make outgoing calls and answer incoming calls. This opens up a wide range of possibilities for customer service, automated outreach, and other voice-based AI applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ultravox integrates with Twilio. This enables the creation of powerful AI-driven voice applications that interact with regular phone networks. This enables you to build AI agents that can make outgoing calls and answer incoming calls. This opens up a wide range of possibilities for customer service, automated outreach, and other voice-based AI applications.
```

For more information on Twilio, refer to the [Twilio documentation](https://www.twilio.com/docs).

:::note[Twilio Support]
We currently integrate with Twilio. Please let us know if there's another integration you'd like to see.
:::

### Creating a Phone Call with Twilio
:::tip[Prerequisites]
Make sure you have:
1. An active Twilio account
1. A phone number purchased from Twilio
:::

Creating an Ultravox call that works with Twilio is just like creating a WebRTC call, but there are two parameters to the [Create Call](./api/calls/#create-call) command worth special attention:

<table class="w-full">
    <tr class="w-full">
        <th class="w-1/12"></th>
        <th class="w-1/12"></th>
        <th class="w-10/12"></th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td class="font-mono">medium</td>
        <td>object</td>
        <td>Tells Ultravox which protocol to use. <br />For Twilio, must be set to `{"twilio": {}}` and sets the call to use Twilio [Media Streams](https://www.twilio.com/docs/voice/media-streams). Defaults to `{"webRtc": {}}` which sets the protocol to WebRTC.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>

>         <td class="font-mono">initiator</td>
>         <td>string</td>
>         <td>Tells Ultravox who started the call. For outgoing calls, typically set to `"INITIATOR_AGENT"`. Default is `"INITIATOR_USER"`.</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        <td class="font-mono">firstSpeaker</td>
        <td>string</td>
        <td>Tells Ultravox who should speak first. For outgoing calls, typically set to `"FIRST_SPEAKER_USER"`. The default is `"FIRST_SPEAKER_AGENT"`.</td>
```

Author: done

    </tr>
</table>

Adding these to the request body when creating the call would look like this:

```javascript
{
  "systemPrompt": "You are a helpful assistant...",
  ...
  "medium": {
    "twilio": {}
  },

>   "initiator": "INITIATOR_AGENT"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "firstSpeaker": "FIRST_SPEAKER_USER"
```

Author: done

### Outgoing Calls

It only takes two steps to make an outgoing call to regular phone numbers through Twilio:
<Steps>
1. **Create an Ultravox Call** → Create a new call (see [above](#creating-a-phone-call-with-twilio)), and get a `joinUrl`.

1. **Initiate Twilio Phone call** → Use the `joinUrl` with a Twilio [`<Stream>`](https://www.twilio.com/docs/voice/twiml/stream).

    ```javascript
    // Example using the twilio node library
    const call = await client.calls.create({
        twiml: `<Response>
                    <Connect>
                        <Stream url="${joinUrl}"/>
                    </Connect>
                </Response>`,
        to: phoneNumber, // the number you are calling
        from: twilioPhoneNumber // your twilio number
    });
    ```
</Steps>

See the [twilio-outgoing-call](https://github.com/fixie-ai/ultradox/tree/main/examples/twilio-outgoing-call) example for more.

This example shows one of the many options Twilio provides for making outgoing calls. Consult the [Twilio docs](https://www.twilio.com/docs) for more details.

### Incoming Calls
Incoming calls require essentially the same two steps as outgoing calls:

<Steps>

> 1. **Create an Ultravox Call** → Create a new call (see [above](#creating-a-phone-call-with-twilio)), and get a `joinUrl`. *Note: for incoming calls you will want to keep `initiator` set to the default ("user").*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Create an Ultravox Call** → Create a new call (see [above](#creating-a-phone-call-with-twilio)), and get a `joinUrl`. *Note: for incoming calls you will want to keep `firstSpeaker` set to the default ("FIRST_SPEAKER_AGENT").*
```

Author: done

1. **Receive Inbound Twilio Phone call** → Use the `joinUrl` with a Twilio [`<Stream>`](https://www.twilio.com/docs/voice/twiml/stream).

    ```xml

>     <!-- Example using a TwiML Bin -->

Reviewer: This won't work with TwiML Bin since you need a new joinUrl for each call.  Let's call this an example TwiML response instead.

Author: done

    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
    <Response>
        <Connect>
            <Stream url="your_ultravox_join_url" />
        </Connect>
    </Response>

    ```
</Steps>

The above shows how to create a TwiML Bin and use that for handling the inbound call. Consult the [Twilio docs](https://www.twilio.com/docs) for more on all the options Twilio provides for handling phone calls.

> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## WebSocket Integration

:::caution[Server-to-Server Only]
WebSocket connections are designed for server-to-server communication. For browser or mobile applications, use our client SDKs with WebRTC for optimal performance. WebSocket connections over TCP can experience audio blocking and ordering constraints that make them unsuitable for direct client use.
:::

### Use Cases and Limitations
#### Ideal Use Cases:

> * Server-to-server integrations where you already maintain client connections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Server-to-server integrations where you already maintain client connections (or have no client)
```

* Scenarios requiring simpler connection handling without WebRTC complexity

> * Applications that need to keep AI generations on your server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Generations happen on our inference server either way.

Author: removed this per your other comment

> ### Use Cases and Limitations
> #### Ideal Use Cases:
> 
> * Server-to-server integrations where you already maintain client connections
> * Scenarios requiring simpler connection handling without WebRTC complexity
> * Applications that need to keep AI generations on your server
> 
> #### Limitations:
> 
> * Not suitable for browser or mobile clients due to TCP constraints
> * Audio blocking can occur as all data shares a single TCP pipe
> * Packets must arrive in order, causing potential delays

Reviewer: I think you've already said all you need to in the caution block.  I'd just remove this whole section (but if you choose not to then see my comments above).

```suggestion
```

### Creating a WebSocket Call

Creating a WebSocket-based call with Ultravox requires setting `medium` to `serverWebSocket` and passing in parameters for sample rates and buffer size.

- **inputSampleRate** (required): Sample rate for input (user) audio (e.g., 48000).
- **outputSampleRate** (optional): Sample rate for output (agent) audio (defaults to inputSampleRate).

> - **clientBufferSizeMs** (optional): Size of the client-side audio buffer in milliseconds. Smaller buffers allow for faster interruptions but may cause audio underflow if network latency fluctuates too greatly. For the best of both worlds, set this to some large value (e.g. 30000) and implement support for [PlaybackClearBuffer](../datamessages#websocket-specific) messages. (defaults to 60).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **clientBufferSizeMs** (optional): Size of the client-side audio buffer in milliseconds. Smaller buffers allow for faster interruptions but may cause audio underflow if network latency fluctuates too greatly. For the best of both worlds, set this to some large value (e.g. 30000) and implement support for [PlaybackClearBuffer](../datamessages#websocket-specific) messages. (Defaults to 60).
```

### Example: Creating an Ultravox Call with WebSockets
```javascript
    const response = await fetch('https://api.ultravox.ai/api/calls', {
        method: 'POST',
        headers: {
            'X-API-Key': 'your_api_key',
            'Content-Type': 'application/json'
        },
        body: JSON.stringify({
            systemPrompt: "You are a helpful assistant...",
            model: "fixie-ai/ultravox",
            voice: "Mark",
            medium: {
                serverWebSocket: {
                    inputSampleRate: 48000,
                    outputSampleRate: 48000,
                    clientBufferSizeMs: 30000
                }
            }
        })
    });

    const { joinUrl } = await response.json();
    ```

> :::note[Data Messages]

Reviewer: Probably need a section on actually joining a call too.

```python
import websockets

socket = await websockets.connect(join_url)
audio_send_task = asyncio.create_task(_send_audio(socket))
async for message in socket:
    if isinstance(message, bytes):
        # Handle agent audio data
    else:
        # Handle data message. See *insert link to /datamessages*.

...

async def _send_audio(socket: websockets.WebSocketClientProtocol):
    async for chunk in some_audio_source:
        # chunk should be a bytes object containing s16le PCM audio from the user
        self._socket.send(chunk)
```

Author: added
